Title: The Comfort of Being Known by God

----

Date: 2016-08-03

----

Coverimage: 

----

Text: 

In the seventeenth century Richard Baxter called being known by God “the full and final comfort of a believer.”  And J.I. Packer, author of the best-selling book, Knowing God, claims that there is “unspeakable comfort” in being known by God.   But how does it work?  And what difference does being known by God make when you are in trouble?  

Speaking personally, at a point in my life when I was in real difficulty, knowing that I was known by God brought real comfort.  It meant that I did not lose hope.   God had not abandoned or forgotten me.  Being known in my distress gave me a sense of safety and security.  A fixed point when everything else was shaky.  The comfort I received from God was not the sort that had me leaping out of bed in the mornings or whistling a happy tune.  But it did douse a destructive pessimism that was threatening to engulf me.  If I felt unsure about whom I was anymore, at least God knew who I was.

With respect to the comfort of being known by God, psychologist Maureen Minor likens God to the ideal parent who offers his children his loving attention and a secure attachment that provides “a safe haven and a secure base from which to engage the world.”   

The comfort of being known when in distress ranges from his specific and active care in which God meets the need in question to a more general notion of consolation simply in being known by him as a parent knows their child.  In terms of the latter, it seems that being known by God within a secure and loving relationship can help provide a stable and secure identity, not unlike that which parents hope to give to their young children, which is cheering and comforting in and of itself.  This can be the case irrespective of practical assistance.  Being known by God meets our deepest need to be acknowledged and valued.

>My youngest child chased a ball into some rose bushes and emerged with a few minor scratches.  Before having his wounds cleaned and dressed what he wanted most was a reassuring embrace from his imperfect earthly father.  He needed the comfort of being known.  

When a young child stubs his or her toe, they might need some medical attention.  But they also need the reassuring embrace of a caregiver.  When confronted with uncertainty and hardship, being known by God offers this sort of comfort.  Isaiah 66:13: “As a mother comforts her child, so will I comfort you.”  According to Loyola McLean:

>“The benefits of such consolation also extend psychologically to the affirmation of one’s lovability, one’s value and one’s belonging to someone that can be internalized in a positive schema of self and potentially then accessed at times of challenge.”  

In times of distress we often feel worthless and unloved, as if no one cares or even notices.  Being known by God puts the lie to these destructive thoughts.

----

Tags: known by god,identity,comfort